doc: update environment helpers in dockerTools docs, add fakeNss section (#285223)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/build-helpers/images/dockertools.section.md

## Environment Helpers {#ssec-pkgs-dockerTools-helpers}

When building Docker images with Nix, you might also want to add certain files that are expected to be available globally by the software you're packaging.
Simple examples are the `env` utility in `/usr/bin/env`, or trusted root TLS/SSL certificates.
Such files will most likely not be included if you're building a Docker image from scratch with Nix, and they might also not be included if you're starting from a Docker image that doesn't include them.
The helpers in this section are packages that provide some of these commonly-needed global files.

Most of these helpers are packages, which means you have to add them to the list of contents to be included in the image (this changes depending on the function you're using to build the image).
[](#ex-dockerTools-helpers-buildImage) and [](#ex-dockerTools-helpers-buildLayeredImage) show how to include these packages on `dockerTools` functions that build an image.
For more details on how that works, see the documentation for the function you're using.

### usrBinEnv {#sssec-pkgs-dockerTools-helpers-usrBinEnv}

> This provides the `env` utility at `/usr/bin/env` by linking to the `env` binary from the `coreutils` package.

Author: I don't consider the manual as an interface that we commit to, but rather as a digest of the current state of the code (code should be free to change without the constraints of what the docs said before). However, I'm pretty sure some audience might interpret it as something we're committing to, so I'll reword this to prevent that interpretation.

### binSh {#sssec-pkgs-dockerTools-helpers-binSh}

> This provides a `/bin/sh` link to the `bash` binary from the `bashInteractive` package.

Author: Added a note both on docs and in the code to help ensure we don't break this use case.

### caCertificates {#sssec-pkgs-dockerTools-helpers-caCertificates}

This adds trusted root TLS/SSL certificates from the `cacert` package in multiple locations in an attempt to be compatible with binaries built for multiple Linux distributions.
The locations currently used are:

- `/etc/ssl/certs/ca-bundle.crt`
- `/etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt`
- `/etc/pki/tls/certs/ca-bundle.crt`

[]{#ssec-pkgs-dockerTools-fakeNss}
### fakeNss {#sssec-pkgs-dockerTools-helpers-fakeNss}

This is a re-export of the `fakeNss` package from Nixpkgs.
See [](#sec-fakeNss).

### shadowSetup {#ssec-pkgs-dockerTools-shadowSetup}

> This is a script that sets up files needed for [`shadow`](https://github.com/shadow-maint/shadow) to work (using the `shadow` package from Nixpkgs), and provides all its binaries in `PATH` to allow follow-up scripts to use them.

Author: Restructured the text there to avoid any confusion. Because of that, it might take a bit longer for a reader to understand exactly what the manual is saying, but I linked to the examples which should be the last piece they need to understand things.

It is similar to [`fakeNss`](#sssec-pkgs-dockerTools-helpers-fakeNss), but only sets up a `root` user with different values for the home directory and the shell to use, in addition to setting up files for [PAM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux_PAM) and a {manpage}`login.defs(5)` file.
Due to how it sets up everything for `shadow` to work, you can add any extra users and/or groups yourself with its utilities.

Since it is a script, this should be used with other dockerTools functions in attributes that expect scripts.
See [](#ex-dockerTools-shadowSetup-buildImage) and [](#ex-dockerTools-shadowSetup-buildLayeredImage) for how to do that.

:::{.note}

> It is recommended to use either `fakeNss` or `shadowSetup` depending on your use case, but not both.

Author: It depends on how you use them. For example, using both with `buildLayeredImage` doesn't break, but it breaks with `buildImage`. I'll update the language to make it a bit stronger.

:::

### Examples {#ssec-pkgs-dockerTools-helpers-examples}

:::{.example #ex-dockerTools-helpers-buildImage}
# Using `dockerTools`'s environment helpers with `buildImage`

This example adds the [`binSh`](#sssec-pkgs-dockerTools-helpers-binSh) helper to a basic Docker image built with [`dockerTools.buildImage`](#ssec-pkgs-dockerTools-buildImage).
Without this helper, it wouldn't be possible to enter a shell inside a container running this image.
This is the `buildImage` equivalent of [](#ex-dockerTools-helpers-buildLayeredImage).

```nix
{ dockerTools, hello }:
dockerTools.buildImage {
  name = "env-helpers";
  tag = "latest";

  copyToRoot = [
    hello
    dockerTools.binSh
  ];
```

After building the image and loading it in Docker, we can create a container based on it and enter a shell inside the container.

> This wouldn't be possible without `binSh`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is made possible by `binSh`.
```

It doesn't have a monopoly on this.

```shell
$ nix-build
(some output removed for clarity)
/nix/store/2p0i3i04cgjlk71hsn7ll4kxaxxiv4qg-docker-image-env-helpers.tar.gz
$ docker load -i /nix/store/2p0i3i04cgjlk71hsn7ll4kxaxxiv4qg-docker-image-env-helpers.tar.gz
(output removed for clarity)
$ docker run --rm -it env-helpers:latest /bin/sh
sh-5.2# help
GNU bash, version 5.2.21(1)-release (x86_64-pc-linux-gnu)
(rest of output removed for clarity)
```
:::

:::{.example #ex-dockerTools-helpers-buildLayeredImage}
# Using `dockerTools`'s environment helpers with `buildLayeredImage`

This example adds the [`binSh`](#sssec-pkgs-dockerTools-helpers-binSh) helper to a basic Docker image built with [`dockerTools.buildLayeredImage`](#ssec-pkgs-dockerTools-buildLayeredImage).

> Without this helper, it wouldn't be possible to enter a shell inside a container running this image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This helper makes it possible to enter a shell inside the container.
```

As before, and if you want to reinforce the container/image relation, do it earlier, but I don't think it's needed.

This is the `buildLayeredImage` equivalent of [](#ex-dockerTools-helpers-buildImage).

```nix
{ dockerTools, hello }:
dockerTools.buildLayeredImage {
  name = "env-helpers";
  tag = "latest";

>   contents = [

Reviewer: Not sure that we should recommend this. `contents` has too much implicit behavior for my taste at least.
By making the choice of merging logic explicit, we inform the reader (and our readers' code's readers) of the implementation choice, which they may well have to change.
`symlinkJoin` and `buildEnv` are quite different.

Author: Can you elaborate on this? I'm a bit confused, because there are a couple things going on in my mind:
- `buildImage` uses `copyToRoot` and has `contents` as deprecated, but this example uses `buildLayeredImage` which only provides `contents` for putting stuff into the image. Did you make this comment with this in mind already?
- If you did, I wasn't aware of any scenarios where `contents` in `buildLayeredImage` would cause issues due to implicit behaviour. Can you give me some pointers to learn more about this? This seems like something we definitely want to have documented in the manual, but currently this is not mentioned at all.

Reviewer 2: It seems fine to me, let's merge this for now and improve the section with future PRs :)

    hello
    dockerTools.binSh
  ];

  config = {
    Cmd = [ "/bin/hello" ];
  };
}
```

After building the image and loading it in Docker, we can create a container based on it and enter a shell inside the container.

> This wouldn't be possible without `binSh`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is made possible by `binSh`.
```

```shell
$ nix-build
(some output removed for clarity)
/nix/store/rpf47f4z5b9qr4db4ach9yr4b85hjhxq-env-helpers.tar.gz
$ docker load -i /nix/store/rpf47f4z5b9qr4db4ach9yr4b85hjhxq-env-helpers.tar.gz
(output removed for clarity)
$ docker run --rm -it env-helpers:latest /bin/sh
sh-5.2# help
GNU bash, version 5.2.21(1)-release (x86_64-pc-linux-gnu)
(rest of output removed for clarity)
```
:::

:::{.example #ex-dockerTools-shadowSetup-buildImage}
# Using `dockerTools.shadowSetup` with `dockerTools.buildImage`

This is an example that shows how to use `shadowSetup` with `dockerTools.buildImage`.
Note that the extra script in `runAsRoot` uses `groupadd` and `useradd`, which are binaries provided by the `shadow` package.

> These binaries are added to the `PATH` because of the `shadowSetup` script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These binaries are added to the `PATH` by the `shadowSetup` script, but only for the duration of `runAsRoot`.
```

Reviewer: This should be added to the earlier text too!

```nix
{ dockerTools, hello }:
dockerTools.buildImage {
  name = "shadow-basic";
  tag = "latest";

  copyToRoot = [ hello ];

  runAsRoot = ''
    ${dockerTools.shadowSetup}
    groupadd -r hello
    useradd -r -g hello hello
    mkdir /data
    chown hello:hello /data
  '';

  config = {
    Cmd = [ "/bin/hello" ];
    WorkingDir = "/data";
  };
}
```
:::

:::{.example #ex-dockerTools-shadowSetup-buildLayeredImage}
# Using `dockerTools.shadowSetup` with `dockerTools.buildLayeredImage`

> This is an example that shows how to use `shadowSetup` with `dockerTools.buildLayeredImage`, because it requires `enableFakechroot` to be set to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Don't document the documentation here. Please move this to the `shadowSetup` docs: When used with `buildLayeredImage`, pass `enableFakechroot`. See example.

It accomplishes the same thing as [](#ex-dockerTools-shadowSetup-buildImage), but using `buildLayeredImage` instead.

Note that the extra script in `runAsRoot` uses `groupadd` and `useradd`, which are binaries provided by the `shadow` package.

> These binaries are added to the `PATH` because of the `shadowSetup` script.

Reviewer: Same
